---
title: Mimesis and Violence
book: The Girard Reader
chapter: 1
author: Rene Girard
pp: 9-19
year: 1979
---

## 9
 - Mimetic rivalry forms a positive feedback loop wherein A is the model for B and B is the model for A.

> Violence is generated by this process; or rather violence is the process itself when two or more partners try to prevent one another from appropriating the object they all desire through physical or other means.

 - We look to assign blame (judicial viewpoint), searching for what is different between violence and non-violence; culprit and innocent.

## 10

 - Aggression as cause of violence? No. (No reason given.)
 - Scarcity? (Economic viewpoint) No. --- Scarcity does not produce rivalry and violence in animals.
 - Imitation is common to animals and people
 - Religious prohibitions, taboos protect against mimetic rivalry
 - Mimetic violence is behind plagues, floods, general chaos, etc in mythogology
 - Twins

>These themes represent what mythology is unable to conceive rationally, the undifferentiated reciprocity of mimetic conflict.

> Many rituals begin with a mimetic free-for-all during which hierarchies disintegrate, prohibitions are transgressed, and all participants become each other's conflictual doubles or twins.

## 11

 - Inability of religious anthropology to find the meaning of ritual. Denial that there is a problem. Minimize role of religion in culture.

 - Ritual enacts a decisive reordering, through sacrifice.
 - Sacrifice is a communal action, which purifies.
 - Ritual crisis.


 - Ritual, sacrifice, and myth are all attempts to recapture or reproduce the beneficial effect of the original collective murder.
 - Freud was right about collective murder, but wrong in his interpretation.
 - Religious communities necessarily misinterpret and transfigure the event. This misrepresentation itself is the essential act of that resolves he conflict.
 - Ritual mimics the original collective murder or expulsion.

 - Scapegoat

## 12

> Scapegoat effect: Two or more people are reconciled at the expense of a third party who appears guilty or responsible for whatever ails, disturbs or frightens the scapegoaters.

## 13

## 14

 - Religious ritual begins in disorder and ends in order. 
 - Taboos and prescriptions come into conflict with each other. 
 - Modern religious reformers have independently (HA!) noticed this contradiction, seen it as hypocritical, and sought to:
    - Minimize the contradiction
    - Reduce disorder

AW: 
 - The chaos of the three-ring circus of the Medieval Roman Rite(s) vs. the "Noble Simplicity" of the post-Concilliar liturgy.
 - Carnival into Lent
 - Ash Wed readings about fasting privately; Call no man Father; Daniel's Ash Wed. sermon
 - The anti-hypocrisy concern of Puritanism
 - No sherry.

> Mythology and religious cults form systems of representation necessarily untrue to their own genesis.

 - Scapegoaters cannot know they are scapegoating. 
 - They must believe the scape goat is truly responsible.
 - Victim cannot be arbitrary

## 15

 - Difficulty of successful scapegoating in modern world where we are increasingly aware of the scapegoat effect.

> Scapegoating can continue only if its victims are perceived primarily as scapegoaters.

 - Evidence is sketchy because the community has to lie. There is no neutral record.
 - However, the tell-tale signs of the lie abound.

 - Scapegoat must _appear_ to really be responsible. He is a subversive. His transgressions signify the destruction of the natural order.

 - Oedipus
 - Jews

AW:
 - the rich / the 1%

## 16

 - Progress toward a general recognition of scapegoat effect
 - Uncertainty principle

## 17

 - Scapegoating is LESS effective
 - So we have MORE scapegoats
 - BECAUSE we are more concerned with issues of victimage, oppression, and persecution 

 - Bible --- sides with the victims
 - the Bible is NOT mythology --- because it tells the truth about the scapegoat mechanism, not a lie.
 - Joseph and his brothers; J and Potiphar's wife (ala Oedipus) --- Bible narr. does not believe the accusations
 - Bible is "counter-mythical"

# 18

 - Passion over and against sacrifice

> The sacrifical misreading common to Christians and non-Christians alike has obscured the nonsacrificial significance of the Judeo-Christian Scriptures but not entirely suppressed its impact.

 - Culture is a smash up of Biblical and Sacrifical POVs, like new wine in old wineskins.

