## One --- The Spirituality of Jesus: Living the Reign of God

> Now after John was arrested, Jesus came to Galilee, proclaiming the good news of God, and saying, “The time is fulfilled, and the kingdom of God has come near; repent, and believe in the good news.”
> --- Mark 1:14–15

Even the casual reader of the New Testament can hardly avoid noticing several significant themes that seem to permeate its content. One is the constant reference to “good news,” often translated by the old English word gospel. Indeed, the four books which preserve what we know about the life of Jesus are themselves called “gospels”—“good news” as told by Matthew, Mark, Luke and John. Far from being objective biographical sketches, they intend instead to tell a story which, it is assumed, the reader will indeed find to be good news.

But while most readers of the scripture would not find that concept particularly surprising, many would be nonplused when they notice what Jesus describes as ”the good news,” because to many modern ears it seems strange, perhaps irrelevant. Yet unless we notice the content of the good news as Jesus understood it, we may miss his point entirely. The verses from Mark’s gospel quoted above, which appear at the very beginning of his account of Jesus’ life and ministry, make its meaning very clear: the “good news” is the announcement that “the kingdom of God has come near.” 

The modern spiritual pilgrim might wonder what “good news” there might be in such a message. We might well ask how on earth the language and imagery that reflects a world so distant and alien from our own could possibly give us “good news.” The question deserves to be taken seriously.

In the first place, Americans, whether Christians or not, are the heirs of a political and cultural tradition that honors a revolt against a king. If we think about kings at all, it is to remember the oppressive wrongs of the British monarchy catalogued in the Declaration of Independence and against which our patriot ancestors fought and won a revolution. In our vocabulary, the language of kingship is set over against freedom. To describe God in royal terms would seem more appropriate to that demanding and unforgiving deity I encountered in rural Panama than to a God whose presence is good news. 

Furthermore, kings are male; in the ancient world, they were patriarchal leaders whose very word was law and whose absolute sovereignty placed them at the head of a hierarchy that dominated women, children, and slaves. Not much good news there!

Finally, we are used to thinking of a “kingdom” as a geographical place, to be found on a map and listed in an itinerary. Surely there is not much “good news” in an image that makes it sounds as if God were the ruler of some obscure country with pretensions of grandeur!

What, then, are we to make of the constant use of the term as Jesus speaks of the “good news” he claims to share? I would like to offer several suggestions. First, we can choose to speak of the “reign of God” to eliminate the overtones of patriarchal imagery and the hint of geography that cling to the notion of kingship. I believe that this phrase actually comes closer to what Jesus intended by it than the English word “kingdom.”
But even if we are willing to speak of God’s “reign” rather than “kingdom,” what about the idea that God is a tyrannical governor of the universe who doesn’t take no for an answer?
When we begin to explore the language and imagery of Jesus, he often catches us by surprise by inverting its traditional meaning in order to give it an entirely different significance, almost as if he is playing with the meaning of the words and challenging us to get what he means. For example, when he wanted to explain his concept of leadership, he took a basin of water and began to wash his disciples’ feet—the lowliest of chores, restricted in his world to household slaves. When he entered the city of Jerusalem on the eve of his death, he accepted the praise of the crowds and acted out the gestures—riding into the city on a donkey—as if he were the king they had been waiting for; but then he went on to stand mute before the Roman governor and die the death of a criminal. Clearly when Jesus spoke of “lordship” and “kingship” he was not using those words as his enemies, or even his friends, ordinarily used them. 
Indeed, the story of Jesus’ experience in the desert, which follows his baptism and his dramatic coming to awareness of the mission to which God has called him, tells us that behaving as kings are expected to do was one of the ways he was tempted to use his power for his own purposes. And the gospels make clear that this would have been a betrayal of his calling. So we can be certain that whatever he meant when he spoke of God’s reign, Jesus was specifically rejecting the everyday meaning of the words. 
So what did he mean? There is an important clue in the prayer Jesus taught his followers to say. “Pray then in this way: Our Father in heaven, hallowed be your name. Your kingdom come. Your will be done, on earth as it is in heaven.” It sounds as if the phrase “Your will be done, on earth as it is in heaven,” is itself something of an explanation of the words that precede it: The reign of God is what the earth would be like if God’s will for it were ever accomplished. Understood in those terms, the reign of God might indeed turn out to be promising—if we can trust that God’s will is indeed good news. Certainly Jesus believed that it was. And if God’s reign is something we are to pray for rather than something God imposes on us against our will, then it has nothing at all to do with contradicting our freedom; quite the contrary. Jesus’ prayer, and his parables, point to a God who wills good things for us but who invites us rather than coerces us to seek what God promises. In other words, God’s reign does not destroy our freedom; it affirms and even depends upon our freedom. The spirituality of Jesus does not point us away from the world; it invites us to hope and believe that the world can be changed, and that how we live with God is reflected in how we live in the world.
+ + +
When Jesus spoke of God’s reign, he was drawing on the hopes and dreams of generations of his own Jewish people, the spirituality formed by their experience of life with God as well as the memories of their ancestors. Jesus’ own life with God was steeped in the Jewish heritage that shaped him and gave him his sense of who he was. Like all Jews, Jesus found his identity in the covenant between God and Israel that had given them their being and their history.
Long before Jesus’ time, the wisest religious minds of his people had come to understand that covenant as a God-given calling that carried with it a very specific mission. If Israel was to be considered God’s people, it was not so that they would enjoy special privileges but so that God’s creative love could be made clear to the whole world. Israel understood itself as nothing less than a “light to the nations.” (Isaiah 49:6)
The sign of the covenant between God and Israel was the Torah, the Law that established how the people were to live in harmony with God, each other and the natural world of which they were part. If people sometimes chafed under its demands and often ignored its hard parts, they rarely forgot its joyful aspect: every stroke, every dot of the Torah was a sign of the bond of harmony—shalom—that was meant to influence the life of the people.
Indeed, shalom was meant to be the chief characteristic of life under God’s Law. We are used to translating it as “peace,” but to Hebrew speakers it conveys far more: well-being, justice, abundance, joyous harmony, the condition we enjoy when we are fully in God’s presence. Shalom is experienced in the quiet celebration of the Sabbath rest, in the celebration that marks the victory over oppressors, in the feasting of great national holidays like Passover, and in the moments of joy that touch families and communities.
The shalom glimpsed in those moments is understood to be a sign of what God intends for the whole creation. Israel’s poets, teachers and songsters left behind a rich deposit of hymns and visions of what it would be like if we experienced God’s shalom in all its fullness. They imagined great wedding banquets, fountains of cold spring water, the whole world made new. They painted images of cities seized by a holiday spirit and bedecked with gold and precious stones. 
But those same poets and prophets were also painfully aware that the vision of God’s reign had its ironic side, because it served to remind them how far from God’s dreams was the world as they lived in it day by day. God willed peace; their history was often written in blood. God commanded justice; but the rich grew richer and more cruel, “buying the poor for silver and the needy for a pair of sandals” (Amos 8:6). God created in abundance, but some feasted while others starved. God yearned for life, but death seemed everywhere.
In such times, those among Jesus’ people who plumbed the vision of God’s reign most deeply became aware of the importance of signs, clues by which we can recognize and hold on to the promise and the hope of that reign. It is not how the rich and prosperous fare that will signify whether God’s will is being done, but the fate of the poor, the victims, those on the margins. 
The Torah that marked the bond between God and Israel was at great pains to spell out concrete actions by which those most vulnerable are cared for. Actions reflect values, the values of God’s reign. For this reason, the Torah commanded farmers not to sweep up the grain that had fallen in their fields at harvest time; it was to be left for the poor of the land who hd no fields to harvest. Because their status in ancient Israel was so tenuous, the Law was especially attentive to the needs of widows and orphans. The comfortable people of Israel were forbidden to celebrate the Passover festival without being mindful of those who could not afford the lamb that was offered and then eaten; everyone was to share in the feast.
The Law of God’s covenant with Israel began with Passover: the memory of the people’s liberation from their slavery in Egypt and their faith that God willed freedom for them. Perhaps most remarkable of all, the Law provided for the periodic return of all property that had fallen into the hands of creditors. Twice a century, the “Year of Jubilee” commanded that lands and farmhouses sold out of need be returned to their original owners. Their debt was at an end. There was to be no permanent gap between rich and poor, haves and have-nots. The fact that scholars doubt if this particular law was ever kept takes away nothing of its power and its intention: the God of Israel is a God of life, who does not will that anyone should suffer want or misery. The Jews affirmed that the same God who breathed life into a world of glorious and harmonious diversity still animates that same creation with life.
+ + +
The spirituality that shaped the religious life of Jesus and his people was a legacy formed by centuries of living with such a God. Battered by history, they continued to believe that God had better hopes for them. Those hopes were not only based on the occasional signs of promise of a better life they encountered from time to time; they were founded even more on their memories and the story of how their ancestors had been saved, not once but over and over, from what appeared to be certain calamity. They rejoiced in the beauty of nature, and identified it as God’s handiwork;
but they also recalled that when their ancestors had been slaves, God had brought them to freedom in a new land. No matter how terrible their situation became—and it often was terrible indeed—they told and re-told the stories of their deliverance. 
The spirituality of Jesus and his people was a constant looking backward in order to look forward in hope. In the re-telling of the stories of how God had saved them, they could dare to look forward to the time when God would once again change their despair into promise. Remembering what God had done awakened their imagination to the possibilities of what God would yet do for them—some day. The Jewish people lived with their God in mindful expectation that the misery that seemed to be their lot was not God’s will for them, and that the future would provide a time when God’s will for them, and through them for the whole creation, would actually be fulfilled. It was that hope that carried them as they prayed for God’s reign to come, for God’s will to be done on earth as in heaven. 
In the context of such a spirituality, it is not surprising that “good news” would be nothing more or less than the discovery that what had been looked for was coming true: that the reign of God so long anticipated was taking shape in their midst. Each of the four gospels insists that Jesus is the one who brings God’s promised reign to reality. 
We have already noted that Mark’s gospel, the first and briefest of the four accounts of Jesus that have come down to us, begins its narrative with the good news that in Jesus, “God’s kingdom has come near.” In other words, for Mark the very purpose of Jesus’ life and death is in order to announce the good news that God’s promised reign, prophesied and longed for, is at long last at hand.
For Matthew, Jesus’ identity and mission are couched most profoundly in the language and imagery associated with the expectation of the Messiah or Christ, the “anointed one” expected to fulfil the hopes and expectations that informed Jewish spirituality. While all four gospels identify Jesus as the expected “anointed one,” it is Matthew’s gospel that is most at pains to interpret Jesus’ life in relationship to the history of the Jewish people. It was for this reason that Matthew began his story by tracing Jesus’ descent from Abraham and Sarah, the ancestors of Israel. Everything about Jesus happened, in Matthew’s opinion, “to fulfill what had been spoken by the Lord through the prophet” (Mt. 2:15). No detail of his birth lies outside God’s plan; from the call of Abraham and Sarah to the sending out of Jesus’ followers to “make disciples of all nations,” there is only one story, by which God’s purposes are taking shape in time. To ask how Matthew understood the purpose of Jesus’ life and death is to ask how he conceived the purpose of Israel’s own calling, for in Jesus the whole history of Israel’s relationship with God was fulfilled and brought to fruition.
In the early pages of Luke’s gospel, an old man who had been waiting patiently for God’s “anointed one” exclaims to God that now he can die in peace, “for my eyes have seen your salvation…a light for revelation to the gentiles, and for glory to your people Israel” (Lk. 2:30, 32). Luke perceives the appearance of Jesus on the scene as the pivotal event in world history; before he is even born, his mother can sing with joy of his birth: God 
“has brought down the powerful from their thrones,
and lifted up the lowly;
he has filled the hungry with good things,
and sent the rich away empty.” (Lk. 2: 51–52)
To enter the world of John’s gospel is to leave behind the perspective of Matthew, Mark and Luke, since John’s understanding is the fruit of a different style of reflection and a distinct tradition. Yet it is remarkable that, although John rarely speaks of the “reign of God,” his vision of the meaning of Jesus’ life and death is by no means completely removed from that of the other gospel writers.
In the first verses of John’s gospel, a poetic meditation on the appearance of Jesus identifies him with God’s life-giving intention; indeed, we are invited to think of Jesus as the incarnation—the ‘enfleshment”—of God’s life-giving word that brought the universe into being in the first place. In Jesus, that divine word “became flesh and lived among us” (John 1:14). The Greek word rendered in various translations as “lived” or “dwelt” in fact carries the implications of “pitching one’s tent.” John would have us understand that in Jesus, God has “moved into the neighborhood,” “taken up residence” among humankind. It is the same idea conveyed when Matthew speaks of Jesus in Isaiah’s term, Emmanuel (“God-with-us”). In Jesus, the closeness to God that was promised for God’s reign becomes a possibility.
But it is in his accounts of the “signs” that Jesus did among his followers that John’s understanding of Jesus as the servant of God’s reign becomes most clear. In each case, Jesus demonstrates access to power, beyond ordinary human possibility, that is put to use in remarkable ways. The “signs” Jesus offered are to be read as tokens of the arrival of God’s power on the human scene, signifying the fulfillment of God’s purposes and Jesus’ role in its coming.
If the reign of God is marked above all by shalom, fullness of life, it is in the signs of life-giving that John’s view of Jesus is most clearly aligned with the perspective of the other gospels. When Lazarus, buried for three days, staggers forth from his grave in response to Jesus’ call, it is as if John is telling us as clearly as he can: To be in the presence of Jesus is to touch the reality of God’s reign. John’s Jesus speaks of himself in the unforgettable image of the good shepherd who gives up his life to save the sheep. At the climax of the passage he declares, “I came that they may have life, and have it abundantly” (John 10:10). 
+ + +
Surely it is not by accident that in spite of their differences in outlook, each of the four gospels recalls Jesus’ spirituality as deeply rooted in his belief in, and hope for, the coming of God’s reign.
Proclaiming good news. All four gospels affirm that Jesus proclaimed the arrival of God’s reign and that this message is the good news at the heart of his life with God. Like most great spiritual leaders, Jesus was known to his followers as “Teacher.” The gospels are full of parables, stories with a twist, or “hook,” to catch the hearer with a surprising insight about God and God’s purposes for humankind. They also preserve even briefer comments, some of them only a sentence or two, with which a metaphor or turn of phrase communicates something of Jesus’ vision of God’s ways with us. Those ways are not a secret to be guarded, but news to be shared. What is striking about this aspect of Jesus’ spirituality is the way in which he shared the promise of God’s reign. 
Performing signs of the reign of God. Like any great teacher, Jesus communicated his message not only by his words but by his actions. God’s reign was not simply an idea to be treasured; it shaped how be behaved towards others, especially those with human needs. All four gospels describe how Jesus performed “signs” to indicate the nearness of God’s reign. In doing so, they understood him to be presenting his “credentials:” “If I by the finger of God cast out demons,” he tells a hostile crowd in Luke’s gospel, “then the kingdom of God has come upon you” (Lk. 11:20). That is surely how his contemporaries would have understood stories like the feeding of the five thousand of the wedding in Cana (see John 6:1–14 and John 2:1–11). To them, the jars of fine wine and the feasting on loaves and fishes were not magic tricks, but signs of the abundance that they believed was God’s will for them.
Celebrating God’s reign. The lavish abundance of the reign of God seems to have been a welcome theme in Jesus’ life. His actions, like his words, move easily to celebration. In Luke’s gospel, when he reflects upon the divine joy at the return of those who had distanced themselves from God’s promises, he tells not one but three related stories of loss and return. A shepherd returns to the fold with a lost sheep, a woman seeks and at last finds a lost coin, a son alienates himself from his father and is welcomed back with feasting. In each case Jesus the teacher sees their joy, and the celebration it occasions, as an image of God’s ways with us.
Clearly his followers remembered Jesus as one for whom the gospel of God’s reign was truly good news, joyful news. Even at the solemn moment of his death, its outcome is foreshadowed in the celebration of joy and freedom represented by Passover. However bleak his own circumstances, however bitter the reality of the Jewish people under Roman occupation, Jesus marked that night by feasting and singing hymns of celebration. We cannot narrate the story of Jesus’ betrayal and crucifixion without reference to the Passover memory of liberation and the celebration of life in the face of the threat of death.
Identifying the signs of God’s reign. The lavish outpouring of blessings that he associated with the reign of God kept Jesus from being mean or restrictive about its implications. Others (including some of his closest followers) may have worried about who could, and who could not, share in the feasting God promised. The gospels remember Jesus as one who invites the most unlikely of guests to join in the celebration, and who rejoices when God’s purposes are made concrete, no matter at whose hand. If his disciples had difficulty getting beyond a possessive attitude towards the reign of God, and even speculated about their own favored position within it, Jesus noted how God’s blessings fall on those who deserve them and those who do not. God’s reign is served, he pointed out, not by pious words or even by correctly identifying Jesus, but by those whose actions help make God’s reign become a reality. Jesus was more concerned to identify signs of the reign of God than to restrict them to his own words and deeds.
Pre-figuring the reign of God. Just as Jesus’ life was dedicated to serving God’s reign, the community he called into being was also directly related to that same mission.
Jesus belonged to a people convinced they had been called to serve God’s purposes. The little group that accompanied him on his travels, and the much larger community that soon were called “Christians,” shared their belief that they were meant to live on behalf of the promise of God. Jesus’ followers understood that their community was itself to be a sign of the reign of God and of the values of that reign. If his friends were invited to serve one another rather than competing for privilege, it was because their life together could serve as a sign of how God intends for the whole creation to live in harmony.
Denouncing the enemies of God’s reign. Jesus’ own identification with the service of God’s reign, and his understanding that shalom means fullness of life, drew him inevitably to those whose own claim to life was tenuous and for whom therefore the promise of God’s reign was most certainly good news. All four gospels depict him as at home with those taken to be outcasts, victims of the prejudice and scorn of the powerful and comfortable. We need only consider the cast of characters who people his stories and the story of his own life. Over and over, life is given to someone who has been touched and scarred by the power of death. Illness, rejection, terror and scorn are death’s faces; they are signs of its power as surely as Jesus’ acts are signs in the service of life.
But it is impossible to take seriously the promise and the gift of life at the heart of Jesus’ spirituality without also becoming aware of the threat to life signified by the faces of death. If he announced the reign of God, he also denounced those who opposed it, especially those who used their privilege or power to abuse others in God’s name. The gospels portray Jesus as one who speaks judgment against those who oppress, mistreat and degrade other human beings.
This is nowhere clearer than when he attacked the merchants and bankers who profited from the pious Jews who came to purchase animals for sacrifice or change their money for Temple currency. “It is written, ‘My house shall be a house of prayer’; and you have made it a den of robbers” (Luke 19:45). 
Resisting the power of death. Jesus’ life was a struggle on behalf of life and against the powers of death; there were times when that struggle took the form of resistance. We might see Jesus’ brave celebration of the Passover itself as an act of resistance on behalf of life in the face of death. In Jesus’ time the heavy hand of the Roman Empire controlled the Jewish people, occupied their land, ridiculed their religion, mocked their culture, and reduced them to poverty through taxation. Jesus lived his entire life a land dominated by the ominous presence of Roman soldiers, a corrupt Jewish puppet-king who served Rome’s interests, and a colonial bureaucracy that took the best of what his people produced. Yet when Passover came, Jesus and his friends did not despair at Rome’s apparently unbreakable power; they remembered the night when their ancestors crossed the Red Sea and danced before the God who had saved them. Every observance of Passover under occupation was an act of resistance and a celebration of courageous hope.
Jesus’ last Passover night ended with the appearance of the soldiers sent to arrest him, the screams of torture and the death of the one who had been God’s “anointed one.” His willingness to pay this ultimate price of faithfulness to God’s reign over against the pretensions of any earthly power is itself an act on behalf of the reign of God and the victory of life over death. Resistance, as people in many settings since Jesus’ own have affirmed, can itself be a powerful gesture on behalf of life. When no word can be spoken, silence is its own message. It was a lesson that Jesus’ followers would be called upon to remember in many times and circumstances.
+ + +
This summary is much too brief to plumb the full significance of the reign of God for Jesus’ spirituality as it is described in the four gospels. But if all four gospels do in fact interpret Jesus’ life with God as a calling intimately related to the coming of that reign, it will not surprise us to discover that same vision shaping the way his followers read their own world and attempted to serve it.
For those who heeded Jesus’ call to come and follow, his resurrection from the dead was the greatest sign of all that God’s reign had begun. In its light, they found themselves in astonishing situations and unforeseen circumstances. But they accepted whatever happened to them as part of the on-going story of their life with God and the coming of God’s reign. And what is more, for those who follow Christ and understand the story of their own life with God in relation to the story of Jesus, God’s reign has already begun. They share in that victory over death; it is as if the promise is already on its way to becoming true. “If anyone is in Christ,” wrote Paul, “there is a new creation; everything old has passed away; see, everything has become new” (2 Cor. 5:17).
Two 
Spirituality in Context
The stories of the Jesus we meet in the four gospels help us understand how Jesus lived his life with God in the service of God’s reign. But those stories end with the aftermath of Jesus’ resurrection. His friends knew that in spite of Easter, their life with him would not go on as before. To the contrary, everything was changed. On one hand, the New Testament writers shared a profound conviction that Jesus was still alive, though in a new and barely comprehensible way. Most, perhaps all, expected him to return soon, to right the wrongs of the past and to complete the mission of establishing God’s reign on the earth. At the same time, they knew that their own lives continued to be lived out on the same stage as before, but without the daily face-to-face presence of the one in whom they had come to trust and to whom they often deferred. 
What we know about the unique period in his followers’ history that followed Easter can be inferred from the letters Paul wrote some twenty to thirty years after those events. However, they receive their most detailed treatment at the hands of Luke, who wrote a companion volume to the gospel that bears his name in which he told the story of how faith in the risen Christ moved into the wider world of the Roman Empire. 
Reading Luke’s second volume, known to us as The Acts of the Apostles, does more than carry on the narrative of the aftermath of Jesus’ life, death and resurrection. It also demonstrates how Luke understood the life of his followers as preserving the spirituality which had shaped Jesus’ life: a way of looking at God and the world in the light of God’s promise of a new heaven and a new earth. Like his contemporaries, Luke found clues to help him understand what Jesus was about in re-reading the Hebrew prophets, especially the latter chapters of Isaiah.
Writing at one of the bleakest times in all Israel’s history, the author of those chapters lived with the survivors of brutal defeat and the destruction of Jerusalem and its Temple. Exiled to their conquerors’ capital, they found themselves living through conditions similar to those their ancestors had known during the worst of their slavery in Egypt. Devastated by their defeat and the apparent hopelessness of their condition, they sang bitter songs like the one preserved in the book of Psalms:
By the rivers of Babylon—
there we sat down and there we wept
when we remembered Zion….
O daughter Babylon, you devastator!
Happy shall they be who pay you back
what you have done to us.
Happy shall they be who take your little ones
and dash them against the rock! (Psalm 137:1, 8–9)
But it was Isaiah’s genius to rise above the despair and to re-discover hope as he recalled what God had done for Israel in the past. His spirits lifted by those memories, he dreamed of a new time, when God’s will would once again be done as in the days of the Exodus.
For I am about to create new heavens and a new earth;
the former things shall not be remembered or come to mind.
I am about to create Jerusalem as a joy,
and its people as a delight.
I will rejoice in Jerusalem,
and delight in my people;
no more shall the sound of weeping be heard in it,
Or the cry of distress.
No more shall there be in it
an infant that lives but a few days,
or an old person who does not live out a lifetime;
for one who dies at a hundred years will be considered a youth,
and one who falls short of a hundred will be considered accursed.
They shall build houses and inhabit them;
they shall plant vineyards and eat their fruit.
They shall not build and another inhabit;
they shall not plant and another eat;
for like the days of a tree shall my people be,
and my chosen shall long enjoy the work of my hands.
They shall not labor in vain,
or bear children for calamity;
for they shall be offspring blessed by the Lord –
and their descendants as well.
Before they call I will answer,
while they are yet speaking I will hear.
The wolf shall eat straw like the ox;
but the serpent—its food shall be dust!
They shall not hurt or destroy in all my holy mountain, says the Lord. 
(Isaiah 65: 17–25)
Luke, Paul, and the other followers of Jesus made sense of their understanding of who Jesus was in the light of promises such as these. As they recalled what Jesus had said and done, they interpreted those memories as the beginning of that new creation for which their ancestors had longed. And perhaps even more remarkably, they saw themselves caught up in that promise. 
In the early chapters of the book of Acts, Luke describes how the first disciples found themselves transformed from hesitant, frightened followers into energetic, courageous leaders and advocates. The story of Pentecost recounts how they became aware of God’s power, the power that had made Jesus an advocate of God’s reign, present among them. Surely we are right to see the images of fire and wind in Acts 2 as giving to the disciples what Jesus had received in his own baptism: a strong sense of being chosen by God and of receiving what was needed to accomplish that mission. That assumption is affirmed when, shortly afterwards, we see Peter and John speaking powerfully of the promise of God’s reign and healing a paralytic beggar (Acts 3 and 4). Though Jesus is no longer present, the promise of living in the light of God’s reign goes on. And the signs by which that promise was made tangible continue.
Like the ways in which Jesus lived his life with God in the light of God’s reign, those who came after him experienced signs that confirmed the promise of which Jesus had spoken. Jesus’ way of understanding of what it is like to live with God spread from a small group of believers to become a powerful force throughout the Roman Empire and beyond. That movement could never have happened without both memories and hope, promises and signs.
Reading the history of that movement with care, two things might engage our attention. One is the way that the spirituality of Jesus continued to shape the life of his followers, far beyond the setting where Jesus lived. The other is the way by which that spirituality took root in those strange new settings and gradually became “at home” in ways that neither Jesus nor his friends might have foreseen.
Within a few years, for example, Jesus’ followers were having to wrestle with the relationship between the ancient faith of their Jewish ancestors and the eagerness of people who were not Jews to share the promises of Jesus. 
 Luke gives form to this struggle at several points in the book of Acts, especially in the story of Peter and his encounter with a Roman centurion (Acts 10). At first glance, no one would seem to be a less likely subject for learning to see the world and God as Jesus taught than an imperial military officer . After all, he was the representative of the cruel military occupation under which Jesus had been executed and which continued to impoverish the Jewish people. Most Romans had nothing but scorn for Jews and their religion. Christians, like other Jews, feared and hated the people who had brought misery to their people. Furthermore, like all gentiles, Romans were considered “unclean”—their very touch made it impossible to approach God without undergoing a ritual of purification.
But in a troubling dream, Peter receives an astonishing insight: the old distinction between “clean” and “unclean” which had been at the very heart of Jewish identity and sense of mission does not fit into the vision of a God who is radically welcoming and whose loving care extends to all creation. In the unsettled frame of mind brought on by this dream, Peter does something he probably would never have dared to do otherwise: he welcomes the Roman soldier and his companions and actually begins to tell them about Jesus. To everyone’s surprise, the Romans receive the Holy Spirit—that is, they begin to manifest the signs of God’s presence and power which the disciples had encountered at Pentecost.
Surely we can understand the episode between Peter and the Romans as a sign of God’s reign, recognizable because it is similar to other signs we see in the gospels. Yet it is different as well—indeed, radically different, because it involves telling good news to those previously outside the bonds of the people among whom Jesus moved. It is true that the gospels give us glimpses of a Jesus who healed gentiles, even Romans; but he did not invite them into his company, or assume that they would become followers of his way of seeing and living. Already, ten chapters and only a few years into the story of Jesus’ followers, something has changed, and changed dramatically. The good news has been told in a new and unknown context. 
The later history of the Christian movement demonstrates vividly that sharing the spirituality of Jesus and its expectation of God’s reign in different contexts is not always easy. There is usually a tension between wanting to hold on to the perspective of Jesus himself and the recognition that some elements of that perspective were specific to his own time, place and culture. Many Jewish Christians were appalled by Peter’s behavior in extending hospitality to gentiles. Yet it would seem that many of the earliest of Jesus’ followers found themselves in the (perhaps uncomfortable) position of trying to explain God’s promises to people who had never heard them and who lacked the basic assumptions on which they were based.
That challenge is made both easier and harder when we remember that we do not experience the fullness of God’s reign but rather signs and clues. That means that our awareness of God is always partial and tentative. We do not have access to the fullness of God’s being; otherwise we would be God, not human! Perhaps that is why Jesus was at pains to recognize and identify those signs, even when they were not necessarily evident to his companions.
The spirituality of Jesus is a way of thinking about God and God’s ways with the world that assumes that those signs are very important for helping us move deeper into the mystery of God. The signs he himself offered, as well as those he pointed out, have several traits in common. In the first place, they are always temporary glimpses of God’s purposes for the creation. When a small boy offered five fish and two loaves of bread and five thousand people ate until they couldn’t eat any more, we are right to take that gesture as a powerful sign of the abundance that is associated with God’s reign: the assurance that the world’s hunger is not God’s will. But the next day, everyone who shared that banquet was hungry again. Jesus did not short-circuit or jump over history to the end of all things; he created a moment when people could glimpse and experience what is God’s will for humankind. Even the most dramatic of signs, such as the various stories in which Jesus raises the dead, are temporary; we must assume that Lazarus and the widow’s son and Jairus’ daughter eventually grew old and died like everyone else. The reign of God remains as an unfulfilled promise, beckoning us towards the future.
Furthermore, the signs identified with Jesus always happen at moments of extreme tension between the way things are and the way they would be if God’s purpose were fulfilled. At the wedding in Cana of Galilee, the sign offered when enormous vats of water suddenly run with the finest of wine occurs at a moment of tension between the joy and celebration of life represented by a marriage and the shame and scarcity associated with a family whose supply of wine was running low. The many healings recorded in the New Testament speak to the tension between the will of God for fullness of life and the pain and sufferings which are often the lot of human beings. We might even say that we are most likely to experience signs of God’s reign precisely at those moments, in those contexts, where the present reality most cries out in contrast to the purposes of God summed up in the dream of shalom.
Another way of making this point is to say that Jesus’ words and actions are always dramatically contextual. For twenty centuries, Christians have been arguing over whether the advice or directions Jesus gave to people in the gospel stories somehow lay down universal rules for everyone. When a wealthy young man asked Jesus what he must do to live fully in God’s reign, Jesus told him to sell everything he had, give it to the poor and follow him. Some hearers of the story down through the ages have argued that Jesus meant what he said, not only to one rich man but to anyone with financial resources. But in fact, what Jesus did and said seems to have been very specific in its application. Certainly we can discern a point of view, a set of values and priorities, all of them drawn from what Jesus believed about God and God’s reign; but how he applied them depended entirely on the circumstances. After all, Jesus did not heal every sick person who crossed his path, or feed everyone who was hungry, or anticipate that all his followers would lead itinerant lives. It is surely impossible to fathom just why Jesus did what he did at any given moment; but there is a profound attention to specifics that points towards taking with absolute seriousness the context in which people live and work and which shapes their struggles to live faithfully.
We know that Jesus’ understanding of God, shaped by his own experience and the traditions and hopes of his people, gave him a passion to tell what he knew about God and to invite others to cling to the same promises for which he lived (and died). His vision of a God who is forgiving, welcoming and infinitely attractive gave him a particular insight towards how God must notice and draw near to those whose lives were most distant from the promise of God’s reign: the poor, the ill, the suffering, the lonely, the despised. His own habit of seeking out people whom others scorned, and the harsh words he used towards those who mistreated them, demonstrates what a profound consciousness of justice informed his sense of shalom. For Jesus, the peace of God was not a quiet, meditative solitude, but rather the harmony of people far off being brought near. And it was not an abstract kind of justice, but a sense of the profound dignity and value of every human life that crossed his path and the compassion such a sense provoked.
We might say that Jesus’ spirituality is rooted in a particular understanding of creation, and of humankind’s place within the creation. In spite of his respect for the heritage and vocation of Israel, he seems to have been able to identify and respond to human need whenever he saw it. Most dramatically, his encounter with a gentile woman who insisted that he heal her daughter gives us a glimpse of Jesus’ own growing awareness of the wideness of God’s mercy and care. Much later, when Christian theologians began to reflect in a more ordered way on the implications of insights such as these, they were struck with the ancient Hebrew perception that, in spite of human differences, “God has made of one blood “ all the nations of the earth. More specifically, the many cultures which form the global mosaic by which we human beings live together not only divide us; they also share a great many elements in common, and all are related to God in principle. That is to say, every culture has value, and in many ways affirms the compassion, the justice, the celebration of life which form the destiny of human kind. Yet each culture also has elements that drive a wedge in the oneness of the creation, that glorify violence and hate, that glorify some at the expense of others. This “doctrine of creation” depends upon our awareness of Jesus’ own spirituality, his sense that Israel’s vocation was not for itself alone, and that God’s love casts an ever wider net. The books of the New Testament beyond the gospels give us fascinating glimpses into how his first followers became increasingly aware of what it means to speak of a God whose very name is love.
Future generations of Christians also made much of the fact that Jesus himself lived out the values of God’s reign, not in some abstract ethereal realm but (as the Apostles’ Creed puts it) “under Pontius Pilate,” that is, at a very specific moment in human history and the history of his people. It is useless to try to speak of Jesus’ spirituality apart from his own tradition and culture. The God with whom he lived and in whom he trusted is the God of Israel, who set a people free, brought them home from exile and continued to sustain them under brutal Roman occupation. That is why it makes no sense to consider the spirituality of Jesus without paying attention to the faith of his people and the scripture that nurtured it.
But if Jesus’ spirituality is shaped by, and rooted in, his own culture, then it must be possible for that point of view and way of life to take root in any culture; otherwise, the reign of God will turn out to depend upon the accident of being a first-century Jew! It used to be fashionable for Christian thinkers to point out how appropriate the world in which Jesus was born turned out to be for the propagation of his beliefs: for all its cruelty, the Roman Empire provided secure transportation, effective communication, a “peace” based on its overlordship of many peoples who had previously been at war with one another, a widespread network of language and culture that made it possible for people in the mountains of Syria and peasants in the north of France to speak to each other. But it strikes me that much more important is the specificity of the Jewish setting in which Jesus was born: the assurance that God comes to be with people in their time of need, when history would seem to be their enemy. 
That is something of what Christian theologians mean when they speak of incarnation: that in the figure of Jesus, the very human figure of Jesus, God’s own values and dreams and passion for life take flesh in a very specific, concrete human life. But just what does that mean for our spirituality? 
In the first place, it means that living with God does not require that we reject or ignore the circumstances of our life, but rather, that those circumstances become the raw material of our life with God. The very concrete poetry with which Jesus’ ancestors and friends spoke of God’s reign should help us to see how the everyday world becomes the raw material of our life with God. Perhaps no story he told makes the point better than the one Jesus told about the good Samaritan (Luke 10:25–37). 
In that story, the piety of the priest and Levite required that they ignore the (possibly dead) man lying in the gutter lest contact with a cadaver render them ritually impure. It is the Samaritan who demonstrates what God is like, providing a powerful illustration that God’s image is not restricted only to some human faces and that life-giving spirituality takes human need with absolute seriousness. God—the reality of God, the promise of God, the compassion of God—makes sense to people in the absolute concreteness of their own life and context. It is for this reason that we must identify the spirituality of Jesus as a contextual spirituality.
Furthermore, the spirituality of Jesus is a shared spirituality. The vision of God’s reign that shaped the nature of his relationship with God is itself a shared vision. It is impossible to find anywhere in the pages of the Hebrew or Christian scripture the slightest hint that our destiny with God is a private affair. Perhaps this is one of the hardest of all learnings for American Christians, steeped as we are in the radical individualism of our own context.
The very nature of Jesus’ calling to serve God’s reign made it imperative that he draw a community around him to share his vision. Indeed, as we have seen, that community was meant to be itself a sign of the shalom of God. Jesus’ first followers used a variety of images to stress that the kind of life with God they had learned demanded a community.
Perhaps the most potent of them all is Paul’s image of the Body of Christ, in which Christ is the head and all those who have drawn near to follow him—to share his vision of who God is and what the world might be—are the many parts that make it possible for the body to function.
Like all such images, its full meaning has many dimensions. To describe a community as Christ’s body means that there is, on some level, a fundamental unity between Christ’s very identity—his life—and that of the community of his followers. Of course such an image cannot help but highlight the profound differences between the single-minded faithfulness of Jesus and the failures, selfishness and conflict that have always haunted those who came after him. Nevertheless, it seemed to Paul and his readers that the passion and purpose for which Jesus lived and died continue to be the motivation of the community that formed around him, even though he is no longer physically present to urge them on. Just as the gospels record that Jesus sent his companions out to do what he had done and thus to serve as his representatives, so Paul considered himself and the others who followed Jesus to be sent out with the same mission: to share the good news of what God has in mind for the whole creation. 
Identifying Jesus’ followers with the members of the Body enabled Paul to remind them that the image exerts a powerful brake on the human impulse to consider ourselves more important, even crucial, to the functioning of the body. No one is called to serve God’s reign as Jesus was called; rather, each has been given very specific gifts to participate in creating and identifying signs of the new creation among us, to celebrate the possibilities we find for knowing it more fully, and to resisting whatever violates that reign. Plumbing the metaphor to its depths, Paul reminded his readers that no body can function effectively unless it has all the requisite parts; just as it needs eyes, ears, heart, liver, so the community entrusted with serving God’s reign needs a variety of members and the gifts they have been given.
Eyes do not choose to be eyes, Paul might have said, ears do not choose to be ears. No more do we, who have also been gifted with special traits and abilities that can be useful in serving God’s reign, choose the role we have been given. The spirituality that lies behind the image of the Body of Christ is a perspective and a way of life that notices, recognizes and affirms the gifts each of us has been given, and searches for ways to use them in serving the purposes of God’s reign.
But here too the context for living in the light of God’s reign assumes great importance. The gifts we are given are to be used on behalf of God’s reign precisely in the setting we call home. We are not called to follow Jesus in the first-century Palestine in which he lived. Those of us who are caught by Jesus’ invitation to follow his way of seeing and living are called to do so where we are, not in some place that is either more exotic, or more comfortable, than the place and time where we live.
Another image that made much sense to the first Christians was that of the church, not in the sense we often take it, the building or institution dedicated to God’s purposes, but in the primary meaning of the word. Behind the image of “church” in the New Testament is the Greek word ekklesia, which means “those who are called.” It reflects a central experience of the early followers of Jesus. Most, perhaps all, were aware that while they had made a commitment to God’s reign, however tentative, when they did so the initiative did not come from them. Rather, it seemed to them that they were responding to God’s invitation.
That sense of being called is most obvious in the stories of the Twelve, the special companions of Jesus who were with him from the beginning. All four gospels agree that if those twelve friends stayed close to him, it was because he invited them into that position. Paul first appears on the scene as one of the primary enemies and persecutors of the church, driven by his understanding of the demands of his own faith to hunt out followers of Jesus and turn them over to the appropriate authorities. The fact that he lived the last years of his life as a tireless advocate of God’s reign as it was made clear in Jesus does not represent a thought-out decision to change his mind; it reflects his sense of being called, much to his surprise, to serve the reign of God as Jesus had taught and embodied it.
That same sense of calling pervades the pages of the New Testament. Its men, women and children found themselves within the number of those who saw themselves as having passed, as Paul said, “from death to life” because they accepted Jesus’ vision of God and the world as their own. They reported that they had heard God’s invitation, God’s call, and they responded in fear and joy. In doing so, they also found themselves caught up in adventure, danger, and celebration.
+ + +
Christians continue to find meaning, comfort and encouragement in their efforts to serve God’s purposes by sharing the life of the community we have come to call the church. When the church is itself intent on serving God’s reign, people find it a setting for identifying the gifts God has given them, and ways to put them to use on behalf of God’s vision of the new creation. But first they must hear the good news that God does indeed have plans for this world, news that frequently comes through stories that awaken hope. Those stories may be drawn directly from the pages of the New Testament; but they also may be drawn from the efforts of faithful people to use their gifts.
Stories and hope: Whatever the context in which we live, we can experience the dynamic between stories and hope, between hope and taking an active part if re-making the world. Paying attention to context means learning to hear stories in ways that help us see the world around us with new eyes, and to conceive of possibilities where the human imagination might fail. The pattern is clear: stories lead to hope, which in turn leads to action.
But that’s not all we can say about stories and hope. The story of the Christians in any given context can become part of the collection of stories we might call the lore of faith. Their story is profoundly theirs, it belongs deeply to them; but in telling and re-telling it, it becomes part of the shared memory of the Christian community, the Body of Christ. It becomes a story that can awaken hope in others who lives in very different settings, and in the process might well move them to share the good news of God’s reign in their own context.
This is the way of God’s good news: when we hear and tell the stories that makes God’s purposes clear, hope is born. And when hope is at hand, the signs of God’s reign comes into being before our very eyes.
